The Project Gutenberg EBook of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Webster's Unabridged Dictionary

Author: Various

Release Date: August 22, 2009 [EBook #29765]
[Last updated: May 18, 2014]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY ***




Produced by Graham Lawrence




A
A (named a in the English, and most commonly ä in other languages).

Defn: The first letter of the English and of many other alphabets.
The capital A of the alphabets of Middle and Western Europe, as also
the small letter (a), besides the forms in Italic, black letter,
etc., are all descended from the old Latin A, which was borrowed from
the Greek Alpha, of the same form; and this was made from the first
letter (Aleph, and itself from the Egyptian origin. The Aleph was a
consonant letter, with a guttural breath sound that was not an
element of Greek articulation; and the Greeks took it to represent
their vowel Alpha with the ä sound, the Phoenician alphabet having no
vowel symbols. This letter, in English, is used for several different
vowel sounds. See Guide to pronunciation, §§ 43-74. The regular long
a, as in fate, etc., is a comparatively modern sound, and has taken
the place of what, till about the early part of the 17th century, was
a sound of the quality of ä (as in far).

2. (Mus.)

Defn: The name of the sixth tone in the model major scale (that in
C), or the first tone of the minor scale, which is named after it the
scale in A minor. The second string of the violin is tuned to the A
in the treble staff.
 -- A sharp (A#) is the name of a musical tone intermediate between A
and B.
 -- A flat (A) is the name of a tone intermediate between A and G.

A per se Etym: (L. per se by itself), one preëminent; a nonesuch.
[Obs.]
O fair Creseide, the flower and A per se Of Troy and Greece. Chaucer.

A
A (# emph. #).

1. Etym: [Shortened form of an. AS. an one. See One.]

Defn: An adjective, commonly called the indefinite article, and
signifying one or any, but less emphatically.

Defn: "At a birth"; "In a word"; "At a blow". Shak.

Note: It is placed before nouns of the singular number denoting an
individual object, or a quality individualized, before collective
nouns, and also before plural nouns when the adjective few or the
phrase great many or good many is interposed; as, a dog, a house, a
man; a color; a sweetness; a hundred, a fleet, a regiment; a few
persons, a great many days. It is used for an, for the sake of
euphony, before words beginning with a consonant sound [for exception
of certain words beginning with h, see An]; as, a table, a woman, a
year, a unit, a eulogy, a ewe, a oneness, such a one, etc. Formally
an was used both before vowels and consonants.

2. Etym: [Originally the preposition a (an, on).]

Defn: In each; to or for each; as, "twenty leagues a day", "a hundred
pounds a year", "a dollar a yard", etc.

A
A, prep. Etym: [Abbreviated form of an (AS. on). See On.]

1. In; on; at; by. [Obs.] "A God's name." "Torn a pieces." "Stand a
tiptoe." "A Sundays" Shak. "Wit that men have now a days." Chaucer.
"Set them a work." Robynson (More's Utopia)

2. In process of; in the act of; into; to; -- used with verbal
substantives in -ing which begin with a consonant. This is a
shortened form of the preposition an (which was used before the vowel
sound); as in a hunting, a building, a begging. "Jacob, when he was a
dying" Heb. xi. 21. "We'll a birding together." " It was a doing."
Shak. "He burst out a laughing." Macaulay. The hyphen may be used to
connect a with the verbal substantive (as, a-hunting, a-building) or
the words may be written separately. This form of expression is now
for the most part obsolete, the a being omitted and the verbal
substantive treated as a participle.

A
A. Etym: [From AS. of off, from. See Of.]

Defn: Of. [Obs.] "The name of John a Gaunt." "What time a day is it "
Shak. "It's six a clock." B. Jonson.

A
A.

Defn: A barbarous corruption of have, of he, and sometimes of it and
of they. "So would I a done" "A brushes his hat." Shak.

A
A.

Defn: An expletive, void of sense, to fill up the meter
A merry heart goes all the day, Your sad tires in a mile-a. Shak.

A-
A-

Defn: A, as a prefix to English words, is derived from various
sources. (1) It frequently signifies on or in (from an, a forms of
AS. on), denoting a state, as in afoot, on foot, abed, amiss, asleep,
aground, aloft, away (AS. onweg), and analogically, ablaze, atremble,
etc. (2) AS. of off, from, as in adown (AS. ofdüne off the dun or
hill). (3) AS. a- (Goth. us-, ur-, Ger. er-), usually giving an
intensive force, and sometimes the sense of away, on, back, as in
arise, abide, ago. (4) Old English y- or i- (corrupted from the AS.
inseparable particle ge-, cognate with OHG. ga-, gi-, Goth. ga-),
which, as a prefix, made no essential addition to the meaning, as in
aware. (5) French à (L. ad to), as in abase, achieve. (6) L. a, ab,
abs, from, as in avert. (7) Greek insep. prefix a without, or
privative, not, as in abyss, atheist; akin to E. un-.

Note: Besides these, there are other sources from which the prefix a
takes its origin.

A 1
A 1. A registry mark given by underwriters (as at Lloyd's) to ships
in first-class condition. Inferior grades are indicated by A 2 and A
3.

Note: A 1 is also applied colloquially to other things to imply
superiority; prime; first-class; first-rate.

AAM
Aam, n. Etym: [D. aam, fr. LL. ama; cf. L. hama a water bucket, Gr.

Defn: A Dutch and German measure of liquids, varying in different
cities, being at Amsterdam about 41 wine gallons, at Antwerp 36½, at
Hamburg 38¼. [Written also Aum and Awm.]

AARD-VARK
Aard"-vark`, n. Etym: [D., earth-pig.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: An edentate mammal, of the genus Orycteropus, somewhat
resembling a pig, common in some parts of Southern Africa. It burrows
in the ground, and feeds entirely on ants, which it catches with its
long, slimy tongue.

AARD-WOLF
Aard"-wolf`, n. Etym: [D, earth-wolf] (Zoöl.)

Defn: A carnivorous quadruped (Proteles Lalandii), of South Africa,
resembling the fox and hyena. See Proteles.

AARONIC; AARONICAL
Aa*ron"ic, Aa*ron"ic*al, a.

Defn: Pertaining to Aaron, the first high priest of the Jews.

AARON'S ROD
Aar"on's rod`. Etym: [See Exodus vii. 9 and Numbers xvii. 8]

1. (Arch.)

Defn: A rod with one serpent twined around it, thus differing from
the caduceus of Mercury, which has two.

2. (Bot.)

Defn: A plant with a tall flowering stem; esp. the great mullein, or
hag-taper, and the golden-rod.

AB-
Ab-. Etym: [Latin prep., etymologically the same as E. of, off. See
Of.]

Defn: A prefix in many words of Latin origin. It signifies from, away
, separating, or departure, as in abduct, abstract, abscond. See A-
(6).

AB
Ab, n. Etym: [Of Syriac origin.]

Defn: The fifth month of the Jewish year according to the
ecclesiastical reckoning, the eleventh by the civil computation,
coinciding nearly with August. W. Smith.

ABACA
Ab"a*ca, n. Etym: [The native name.]

Defn: The Manila-hemp plant (Musa textilis); also, its fiber. See
Manila hemp under Manila.

ABACINATE
A*bac"i*nate, v.t. Etym: [LL. abacinatus, p.p. of abacinare; ab off +
bacinus a basin.]

Defn: To blind by a red-hot metal plate held before the eyes. [R.]

ABACINATION
A*bac`i*na"tion, n.

Defn: The act of abacinating. [R.]

ABACISCUS
Ab`a*cis"cus, n. Etym: [Gr.Abacus.] (Arch.)

Defn: One of the tiles or squares of a tessellated pavement; an
abaculus.

ABACIST
Ab"a*cist, n. Etym: [LL abacista, fr. abacus.]

Defn: One who uses an abacus in casting accounts; a calculator.

ABANGA
A*ban"ga, n. Etym: [Name given by the negroes in the island of St.
Thomas.]

Defn: A West Indian palm; also the fruit of this palm, the seeds of
which are used as a remedy for diseases of the chest.

ABANNATION; ABANNITION
Ab`an*na"tion, Ab`an*nition, n. Etym: [LL. abannatio; ad + LL.
bannire to banish.] (Old Law)

Defn: Banishment. [Obs.] Bailey.
	
MINGLER
Min"gler, n.

Defn: One who mingles.

MINGLINGLY
Min"gling*ly, adv.

Defn: In a mingling manner.

MINIACEOUS; MINACEOUS
Min`i*a"ceous, a.

Defn: Of the color of minium or red lead; miniate.

MINIARD
Min"iard, a.

Defn: Migniard. [Obs.]

MINIARDIZE
Min"iard*ize, v. t.

Defn: To render delicate or dainty. [Obs.] Howell.

MINIATE
Min"i*ate, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Miniated; p. pr. & vb. n. Miniating.]
Etym: [L. miniatus, p. p. of miniare. See Minium.]

Defn: To paint or tinge with red lead or vermilion; also, to decorate
with letters, or the like, painted red, as the page of a manuscript.
T. Wharton.

MINIATE
Min"i*ate, a.

Defn: Of or pertaining to the color of red lead or vermilion; painted
with vermilion.

MINIATURE
Min"i*a*ture, n. Etym: [It. miniatura, fr. L. miniare. See Miniate,
v.,Minium.]

1. Originally, a painting in colors such as those in mediæval
manuscripts; in modern times, any very small painting, especially a
portrait.

2. Greatly diminished size or form; reduced scale.

3. Lettering in red; rubric distinction. [Obs.]

4. A particular feature or trait. [Obs.] Massinger.

MINIATURE
Min"i*a*ture, a.

Defn: Being on a small; much reduced from the reality; as, a
miniature copy.

MINIATURE
Min"i*a*ture, v. t.

Defn: To represent or depict in a small compass, or on a small scale.

MINIATURIST
Min"i*a*tur`ist, n.

Defn: A painter of miniatures.

MINIBUS
Min"i*bus, n. Etym: [L. minor less + -bus, as in omnibus.]

Defn: A kind of light passenger vehicle, carrying four persons.

MINIE BALL
Min"ie ball`. Etym: [From the inventor, Captain Minié, of France.]

Defn: A conical rifle bullet, with a cavity in its base plugged with
a piece of iron, which, by the explosion of the charge, is driven
farther in, expanding the sides to fit closely the grooves of the
barrel.

MINIE RIFLE
Min"ie ri"fle.

SIBILATION
Sib`i*la"tion, n. Etym: [L. sibilatio.]

Defn: Utterance with a hissing sound; also, the sound itself; a hiss.
He, with a long, low sibilation, stared. Tennyson.

SIBILATORY
Sib"i*la*to*ry, a.

Defn: Hissing; sibilant.

SIBILOUS
Sib"i*lous, a. Etym: [L. sibilus.]

Defn: Having a hissing sound; hissing; sibilant. [R.] Pennant.

SIBYL
Sib"yl, n. Etym: [L. sibylla, Gr.

1. (Class. Antiq.)

Defn: A woman supposed to be endowed with a spirit of prophecy.

Note: The number of the sibyls is variously stated by different
authors; but the opinion of Varro, that there were ten, is generally
adopted. They dwelt in various parts of Persia, Greece, and Italy.

2. A female fortune teller; a pythoness; a prophetess. "An old
highland sibyl." Sir W. Scott.

SIBYLIST
Sib"yl*ist, n.

Defn: One who believes in a sibyl or the sibylline prophecies.
Cudworth.

SIBYLLINE
Sib"yl*line, a. Etym: [L. sibyllinus.]

Defn: Pertaining to the sibyls; uttered, written, or composed by
sibyls; like the productions of sibyls. Sibylline books. (a) (Rom.
Antiq.) Books or documents of prophecies in verse concerning the fate
of the Roman empire, said to have been purchased by Tarquin the Proud
from a sibyl. (b) Certain Jewish and early Christian writings
purporting to have been prophetic and of sibylline origin. They date
from 100 b. c. to a. d. 500.

SIC
Sic, a.

Defn: Such. [Scot.]

SIC
Sic, adv. Etym: [L.]

Defn: Thus.

Note: This word is sometimes inserted in a quotation [sic], to call
attention to the fact that some remarkable or inaccurate expression,
misspelling, or the like, is literally reproduced.

SICAMORE
Sic"a*more, n. (Bot.)

Defn: See Sycamore.

SICCA
Sic"ca, n. Etym: [Ar. sikka.]

Defn: A seal; a coining die; -- used adjectively to designate the
silver currency of the Mogul emperors, or the Indian rupee of 192
grains. Sicca rupee, an East Indian coin, valued nominally at about
two shillings sterling, or fifty cents.

SICCATE
Sic"cate, v. t. Etym: [L. siccatus, p. p. of siccare to dry, fr.
siecus dry.]

Defn: To dry. [R.]

SICCATION
Sic*ca"tion, n. Etym: [L. siccatio.]

Defn: The act or process of drying. [R.] Bailey.

SICCATIVE
Sic"ca*tive, a. Etym: [L. siccativus.]

Defn: Drying; causing to dry.
 -- n.

Defn: That which promotes drying.

SICCIFIC
Sic*cif"ic, a.Etym: [L. siccificus; siccus dry + facere to make. See
-fy.]

Defn: Causing dryness.

SICCITY
Sic"ci*ty, n. Etym: [L. siccitas, fr. siccus dry.]

Defn: Dryness; aridity; destitution of moisture. [Obs.]
The siccity and dryness of its flesh. Sir T. Browne.

SICE
Sice, n. Etym: [F. six, fr. L. sex six. See Six.]

Defn: The number six at dice.

SICER
Si"cer, n. Etym: [L. sicera. See Cider.]

Defn: A strong drink; cider. [Obs.] Chaucer.

SICH
Sich, a.

SHRILL-GORGED
Shrill"-gorged`, a.

Defn: Having a throat which produces a shrill note. [R.] Shak.

SHRILLNESS
Shrill"ness, n.

Defn: The quality or state of being shrill.

MAGENTA
Ma*gen"ta, n. (Chem.)

Defn: An aniline dye obtained as an amorphous substance having a
green bronze surface color, which dissolves to a shade of red; also,
the color; -- so called from Magenta, in Italy, in allusion to the
battle fought there about the time the dye was discovered. Called
also fuchsine, roseïne, etc.

MAGGED
Magged, a. (Naut.)

Defn: Worn; fretted; as, a magged brace. Ham. Nav. Encyc.

MAGGIORE
Mag`gio"re, a. Etym: [It., from L. major, compar. of magnus great.
See Major.] (Mus.)

Defn: Greater, in respect to scales, intervals, etc., when used in
opposition to minor; major. Moore (Encyc. of Music).

MAGGOT
Mag"got, n. Etym: [W. macai, pl. maceiod, magiod, a worn or grub; cf.
magu to bread.]

TALBOTYPE
Tal"bo*type, n. (Photog.)

Defn: Same as Calotype.

TALC
Talc, n. Etym: [F. talc; cf. Sp. & It. talco, LL. talcus; all fr. Ar.
talq.] (Min.)

Defn: A soft mineral of a soapy feel and a greenish, whitish, or
grayish color, usually occurring in foliated masses. It is hydrous
silicate of magnesia. Steatite, or soapstone, is a compact granular
variety. Indurated talc, an impure, slaty talc, with a nearly compact
texture, and greater hardness than common talc; -- called also talc
slate.

TALCOSE; TALCOUS
Tal*cose", Talc"ous, a. Etym: [Cf. F. talqueux.] (Min.)

Defn: Of or pertaining to talc; composed of, or resembling, talc.

TALCUM
Tal"cum, n. [NL.] (Min.)

Defn: Same as Talc.

TALE
Tale, n.

Defn: See Tael.

TALE
Tale, n. Etym: [AS. talu number, speech, narrative; akin to D. taal
speech, language, G. zahl number, OHG. zala, Icel. tal, tala, number,
speech, Sw. tal, Dan. tal number, tale speech, Goth. talzjan to
instruct. Cf. Tell, v. t., Toll a tax, also Talk, v. i.]

1. That which is told; an oral relation or recital; any rehearsal of
what has occured; narrative; discourse; statement; history; story.
"The tale of Troy divine." Milton. "In such manner rime is Dante's
tale." Chaucer.
We spend our years as a tale that is told. Ps. xc. 9.

2. A number told or counted off; a reckoning by count; an
enumeration; a count, in distinction from measure or weight; a number
reckoned or stated.
The ignorant, . . . who measure by tale, and not by weight. Hooker.
And every shepherd tells his tale, Under the hawthornn in the dale.
Milton.
In packing, they keep a just tale of the number. Carew.

3. (Law)

Defn: A count or declaration. [Obs.] To tell tale of, to make account
of. [Obs.]
Therefore little tale hath he told Of any dream, so holy was his
heart. Chaucer.

Syn.
 -- Anecdote; story; fable; incident; memoir; relation; account;
legend; narrative.

TALE
Tale, v. i.

Defn: To tell stories. [Obs.] Chaucer. Gower.

TALEBEARER
Tale"bear`er, n.

Defn: One who officiously tells tales; one who impertinently or
maliciously communicates intelligence, scandal, etc., and makes
mischief.
Spies and talebearers, encouraged by her father, did their best to
inflame her resentment. Macaulay.

TALEBEARING
Tale"bear`ing, a.

Defn: Telling tales officiously.

TALEBEARING
Tale"bear`ing, n.

Defn: The act of informing officiously; communication of sectrts,
scandal, etc., maliciously.

TALED
Ta"led, n. (Jewish Antiq.)

Defn: A kind of quadrangular piece of cloth put on by the Jews when
repeating prayers in the synagogues. Crabb.

TALEFUL
Tale"ful, a.

Defn: Full of stories. [R.] Thomson.

TALEGALLA
Tal`e*gal"la, n. Etym: [NL.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: A genus of Australian birds which includes the brush turkey.
See Brush turkey.

TALENT
Tal"ent, n. Etym: [F., fr. L. talentum a talent (in sense 1), Gr.
tolerare, tollere, to lift up, sustain, endure. See Thole, v. t.,
Tolerate.]

1. Among the ancient Greeks, a weight and a denomination of money
equal to 60 minæ or 6,000 drachmæ. The Attic talent, as a weight, was
about 57 lbs. avoirdupois; as a denomination of silver money, its
value was £243 15s. sterling, or about $1,180.
Rowing vessel whose burden does not exceed five hundred talents.
Jowett (Thucid.).

2. Among the Hebrews, a weight and denomination of money. For silver
it was equivalent to 3,000 shekels, and in weight was equal to about
93

3. Inclination; will; disposition; desire. [Obs.]
They rather counseled you to your talent than to your profit.
Chaucer.

4. Intellectual ability, natural or acquired; mental endowment or
capacity; skill in accomplishing; a special gift, particularly in
business, art, or the like; faculty; a use of the word probably
originating in the Scripture parable of the talents (Matt. xxv. 14-
30).
He is chiefly to be considered in his three different talents, as a
critic, a satirist, and a writer of odes. Dryden.
His talents, his accomplishments, his graceful manners, made him
generally popular. Macaulay.

Syn.
 -- Ability; faculty; gift; endowment. See Genius.

TALENTED
Tal"ent*ed, a.

Defn: Furnished with talents; possessing skill or talent; mentally
gifted. Abp. Abbot (1663).

Note: This word has been strongly objected to by Coleridge and some
other critics, but, as it would seem, upon not very good grounds, as
the use of talent or talents to signify mental ability, although at
first merely metaphorical, is now fully established, and talented, as
a formative, is just as analogical and legitimate as gifted, bigoted,
moneyed, landed, lilied, honeyed, and numerous other adjectives
having a participal form, but derived directly from nouns and not
from verbs.

TALES
Ta"les, n. Etym: [L., pl. of talis such (persons).] (Law) (a) pl.

Defn: Persons added to a jury, commonly from those in or about the
courthouse, to make up any deficiency in the number of jurors
regularly summoned, being like, or such as, the latter. Blount.
Blackstone. (b) syntactically sing.

Defn: The writ by which such persons are summoned. Tales book, a book
containing the names of such as are admitted of the tales. Blount.
Craig.
 -- Tales de circumstantibus Etym: [L.], such, or the like, from
those standing about.

TALESMAN
Tales"man, n.; pl. Talesmen (. (Law)

Defn: A person called to make up a deficiency in the number of jurors
when a tales is awarded. Wharton.

TALETELLER
Tale"tell`er, n.

Defn: One who tells tales or stories, especially in a mischievous or
officious manner; a talebearer; a telltale; a tattler.


ZOOTOMIST; ZOOETOMIST
Zo*öt"o*mist, n. Etym: [Cf. F. zootomiste.]

Defn: One who dissects animals, or is skilled in zoötomy.

ZOOTOMY; ZOOETOMY
Zo*öt"o*my, n. Etym: [Zoö- + Gr. zootomie.]

Defn: The dissection or the anatomy of animals; -- distinguished from
androtomy.

ZOOTROPHIC; ZOOETROPHIC
Zo`ö*troph"ic, a. Etym: [Gr. Zoö-, and Trophic.] (Physiol.)

Defn: Of or pertaining to the nourishment of animals.

ZOOZOO
Zoo"zoo`, n. Etym: [Of imitative origin.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: The wood pigeon. [Prov. Eng.]

ZOPE
Zope, n. Etym: [G.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: A European fresh-water bream (Abramis ballerus).

ZOPILOTE
Zo"pi*lote, n. Etym: [Sp.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: The urubu, or American black vulture.

ZORIL
Zor"il, n. (Zoöl.)

Defn: Same as Zorilla.

ZORILLA
Zo*ril"la, n. Etym: [Sp. zorilla, zorillo, dim. of zorra, zorro, a
fox: cf. F. zorille.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: Either one of two species of small African carnivores of the
genus Ictonyx allied to the weasels and skunks. [Written also zoril,
and zorille.]

Note: The best-known species (Ictonyx zorilla) has black shiny fur
with white bands and spots. It has anal glands which produce a very
offensive secretion, similar to that of the skunk. It feeds upon
birds and their eggs and upon small mammals, and is often very
destructive to poultry. It is sometimes tamed by the natives, and
kept to destroy rats and mice. Called also mariput, Cape polecat, and
African polecat. The name is sometimes erroneously applied to the
American skunk.

ZOROASTRIAN
Zo`ro*as"tri*an, a.

Defn: Of or pertaining to Zoroaster, or his religious system.

ZOROASTRIAN
Zo`ro*as"tri*an, n.

Defn: A follower of Zoroaster; one who accepts Zoroastrianism.

ZOROASTRIANISM
Zo`ro*as"tri*an*ism, n.

Defn: The religious system of Zoroaster, the legislator and prophet
of the ancient Persians, which was the national faith of Persia;
mazdeism. The system presupposes a good spirit (Ormuzd) and an
opposing evil spirit (Ahriman). Cf. Fire worship, under Fire, and
Parsee.

ZOROASTRISM
Zo`ro*as"trism, n.

Defn: Same as Zoroastrianism. Tylor.

ZOSTER
Zos"ter, n. Etym: [L., fr. Gr. Zone.] (Med.)

Defn: Shingles.

ZOSTERA
Zos"te*ra, n. Etym: [NL.] (Bot.)

Defn: A genus of plants of the Naiadaceæ, or Pondweed family. Zostera
marina is commonly known as sea wrack, and eelgrass.

ZOSTEROPS
Zos"ter*ops, n. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. (Zoöl.)

Defn: A genus of birds that comprises the white-eyes. See White-eye.

ZOUAVE
Zouave, n. Etym: [F., fr. Ar. Zouaoua a tribe of Kabyles living among
the Jurjura mountains in Algeria.] (Mil.)
(a) One of an active and hardy body of soldiers in the French
service, originally Arabs, but now composed of Frenchmen who wear the
Arab dress.
(b) Hence, one of a body of soldiers who adopt the dress and drill of
the Zouaves, as was done by a number of volunteer regiments in the
army of the United States in the Civil War, 1861-65.

ZOUNDS
Zounds, interj. Etym: [Contracted from God's wounds.]

Defn: An exclamation formerly used as an oath, and an expression of
anger or wonder.

ZOUTCH
Zoutch, v. t. (Cookery)

Defn: To stew, as flounders, eels, etc., with just enough or liquid
to cover them. Smart.

ZUBR
Zubr, n. Etym: [Polish .] (Zoöl.)

Defn: The aurochs.

ZUCHE
Zuche, n.

Defn: A stump of a tree. Cowell.

ZUCHETTO
Zu*chet"to, n. Etym: [It. zucchetto.] (R. C. Ch.)

Defn: A skullcap covering the tonsure, worn under the berretta. The
pope's is white; a cardinal's red; a bishop's purple; a priest's
black.

ZUFOLO
Zu"fo*lo, n. Etym: [It.] (Mus.)

Defn: A little flute or flageolet, especially that which is used to
teach birds. [Written also zuffolo.]

ZUIAN
Zu"ñi*an, a.

Defn: Of or pert. to the Zuñis, or designating their linguistic
stock. --n.

Defn: A Zuñi.

ZUISIN
Zui"sin, n. (Zoöl.)

Defn: The American widgeon. [Local, U. S.]

ZULU
Zu"lu, n. [Also Zooloo.]

1. Any member of the tribe of Zulus; a Zulu-Kaffir. See Zulus.

2.  (Philol.) One of the most important members of the South African,
or Bantu, family of languages, spoken partly in Natal and partly in
Zululand, but understood, and more or less in use, over a wide
territory, at least as far north as the Zambezi; -- called also Zulu-
Kaffir.

ZULU-KAFFIR
Zu"lu-Kaf"fir, n.

Defn: A member of the Bantu race comprising the Zulus and the
Kaffirs.

ZULUS
Zu"lus, n. pl.; sing. Zulu (. (Ethnol.)

Defn: The most important tribe belonging to the Kaffir race. They
inhabit a region on the southeast coast of Africa, but formerly
occupied a much more extensive country. They are noted for their
warlike disposition, courage, and military skill.

ZUMBOORUK
Zum*boo"ruk, n. Etym: [Turk. & Ar. zamb, fr. Ar. zamb a hornet.]
(Mil.)

Defn: A small cannon supported by a swiveled rest on the back of a
camel, whence it is fired, -- used in the East.

ZUMIC; ZUMOLOGICAL; ZUMOLOGY; ZUMOMETER
Zu"mic, a., Zu`mo*log"ic*al, a., Zu*mol"o*gy, n., Zu*mom"e*ter, n.,
etc.

Defn: See Zymic, Zymological, etc.

ZUNIS
Zu"nis, n. pl.; sing. Zuni (. (Ethnol.)

Defn: A tribe of Pueblo Indians occupying a village in New Mexico, on
the Zuni River.

ZUNYITE
Zun"yite, n. (Min.)

Defn: A fluosilicate of alumina occurring in tetrahedral crystals at
the Zuñi mine in Colorado.

ZWANZIGER
Zwan"zi*ger, n. Etym: [G.]

Defn: Am Austrian silver coin equivalent to 20 kreutzers, or about 10
cents.

ZWIEBACK
Zwie"back`, n. [G., fr. zwie-two, twice (see Twice) + backen to
bake.]

Defn: A kind of biscuit or  rusk first baked in a loaf and afterwards
cut and toasted.

ZWINGLIAN
Zwing"li*an, a. (Theol.)

Defn: Of or pertaining to Ulric Zwingli (1481-1531), the reformer of
German Switzerland, who maintained that in the Lord's Supper the true
body of Christ is present by the contemplation of faith but not in
essence or reality, and that the sacrament is a memorial without
mystical elements. -- n.

Defn: A follower of Zwingli.

ZYGANTRUM
Zy*gan"trum, n.; pl. Zygantra. Etym: [Gr. (Anat.)

Defn: See under Zygosphene.

ZYGAPOPHYSIS
Zyg`a*poph"y*sis, n.; pl. Zygapophyses. Etym: [Gr. apophysis.]
(Anat.)

Defn: One of the articular processes of a vertebra, of which there
are usually four, two anterior and two posterior. See under Vertebra.
 -- Zyg`ap*o*phys"i*al, a.

ZYGENID
Zyg"e*nid, n. Etym: [Cf. Gr. (Zoöl.)

Defn: Any one of numerous species of moths of the family Zygænidæ,
most of which are bright colored. The wood nymph and the vine
forester are examples. Also used adjectively.

ZYGOBRANCHIA
Zyg`o*bran"chi*a, n. pl. Etym: [NL., from Gr. (Zoöl.)

Defn: A division of marine gastropods in which the gills are
developed on both sides of the body and the renal organs are also
paired. The abalone (Haliotis) and the keyhole limpet (Fissurella)
are examples.

ZYGOBRANCHIATE
Zyg`o*bran"chi*ate, a. (Zoöl.)

Defn: Of or pertaining to the Zygobranchia.

ZYGODACTYL; ZYGODACTYLE
Zyg`o*dac"tyl, Zyg`o*dac"tyle, n. Etym: [See Zygodactylic.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: Any zygodactylous bird.

ZYGODACTYLAE
Zyg`o*dac"ty*læ, n. pl. Etym: [NL.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: The zygodactylous birds. In a restricted sense applied to a
division of birds which includes the barbets, toucans, honey guides,
and other related birds.

ZYGODACTYLI
Zyg`o*dac"ty*li, n. pl. Etym: [NL.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: Same as Scansores.

ZYGODACTYLIC; ZYGODACTYLOUS
Zyg`o*dac"ty*lic, Zyg`o*dac"tyl*ous, a. Etym: [Gr. zygodactyle.]
(Zoöl.)

Defn: Yoke-footed; having the toes disposed in pairs; -- applied to
birds which have two toes before and two behind, as the parrot,
cuckoo, woodpecker, etc.

ZYGOMA
Zy*go"ma, n. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. (Anat.)
(a) The jugal, malar, or cheek bone.
(b) The zygomatic process of the temporal bone.
(c) The whole zygomatic arch.

ZYGOMATIC
Zyg`o*mat"ic, a. Etym: [Cf. F. zygomatique.] (Anat.)

Defn: Of, pertaining to, or in the region of, the zygoma. Zygomatic
arch, the arch of bone beneath the orbit, formed in most mammals by
the union of the malar, or jugal, with the zygomatic process of the
temporal bone. In the lower vertebrates other bones may help to form
it, and there may be two arches on each side of the skull, as in some
reptiles.
 -- Zygomatic process, a process of the temporal or squamosal bone
helping to form the zygomatic arch.

ZYGOMORPHIC; ZYGOMORPHOUS
Zyg`o*mor"phic, Zyg`o*mor"phous, a. Etym: [Gr. (Biol.)

Defn: Symmetrical bilaterally; -- said of organisms, or parts of
organisms, capable of division into two symmetrical halves only in a
single plane.

ZYGOPHYTE
Zy"go*phyte, n. Etym: [Gr. (Bot.)

Defn: Any plant of a proposed class or grand division (Zygophytes,
Zygophyta, or Zygosporeæ), in which reproduction consists in the
union of two similar cells. Cf. Oöphyte.

ZYGOSIS
Zy*go"sis, n. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. (Biol.)

Defn: Same as Conjugation.

ZYGOSPERM
Zyg"o*sperm, n. Etym: [Gr. sperm.] (Bot.)

Defn: A spore formed by the union of the contents of two similar
cells, either of the same or of distinct individual plants.
Zygosperms are found in certain orders of algæ and fungi.

ZYGOSPHENE
Zyg"o*sphene, n. Etym: [Gr. (Anat.)

Defn: A median process on the front part of the neural arch of the
vertebræ of most snakes and some lizards, which fits into a fossa,
called the zygantrum, on the back part of the arch in front.

ZYGOSPORE
Zyg"o*spore, n. Etym: [Gr. spore.] (Bot.)
(a) Same as Zygosperm.
(b) A spore formed by the union of several zoöspores; -- called also
zygozoöspore.

ZYLONITE
Zy"lon*ite, n. Etym: [Gr.

Defn: Celluloid.

ZYMASE
Zym"ase, n. Etym: [From Zyme.] (Physiol. Chem.)

Defn: A soluble ferment, or enzyme. See Enzyme.

ZYME
Zyme, n. Etym: [Gr.

1. A ferment.

2. (Med.)

Defn: The morbific principle of a zymotic disease. Quain.

ZYMIC
Zym"ic, a. (Old Chem.)

Defn: Pertaining to, or produced by, fermentation; -- formerly, by
confusion, used to designate lactic acid.

ZYMOGEN
Zym"o*gen, n. Etym: [Zyme + -gen.] (Physiol. Chem.)

Defn: A mother substance, or antecedent, of an enzyme or chemical
ferment; -- applied to such substances as, not being themselves
actual ferments, may by internal changes give rise to a ferment.
The pancreas contains but little ready-made ferment, though there is
present in it a body, zymogen, which gives birth to the ferment.
Foster.

ZYMOGENE
Zym"o*gene, n. Etym: [Zyme + root of Gr. (Biol.)

Defn: One of a physiological group of globular bacteria which
produces fermentations of diverse nature; -- distinguished from
pathogene.

ZYMOGENIC
Zym`o*gen"ic, a. (Biol.)
(a) Pertaining to, or formed by, a zymogene.
(b) Capable of producing a definite zymogen or ferment. Zymogenic
organism (Biol.), a microörganism, such as the yeast plant of the
Bacterium lactis, which sets up certain fermentative processes by
which definite chemical products are formed; -- distinguished from a
pathogenic organism. Cf. Micrococcus.

ZYMOLOGIC; ZYMOLOGICAL
Zy`mo*log"ic, Zy`mo*log"ic*al, a. Etym: [Cf. F. zymologique.]

Defn: Of or pertaining to zymology.

ZYMOLOGIST
Zy*mol"o*gist, n.

Defn: One who is skilled in zymology, or in the fermentation of
liquors.

ZYMOLOGY
Zy*mol"o*gy, n. Etym: [Zyme + -logy: cf. F. zymologie.]

Defn: A treatise on the fermentation of liquors, or the doctrine of
fermentation. [Written also zumology.]

ZYMOLYSIS
Zy*mol"y*sis, n. [NL. See Zyme, and Lysis.] (Physiol. Chem.)

Defn: The action of enzymes; also, the changes produced by such
action. --Zy`mo*lyt"ic (#), a.



ZYMOME
Zy"mome, n. Etym: [Gr. (Old Chem.)

Defn: A glutinous substance, insoluble in alcohol, resembling
legumin; -- now called vegetable fibrin, vegetable albumin, or gluten
casein.

ZYMOMETER; ZYMOSIMETER
Zy*mom"e*ter, Zy`mo*sim"e*ter, n. Etym: [Gr. -meter: cf. F.
zymosimètre.]

Defn: An instrument for ascertaining the degree of fermentation
occasioned by the mixture of different liquids, and the degree of
heat which they acquire in fermentation.

ZYMOPHYTE
Zym"o*phyte, n. Etym: [Zyme + Gr. (Physiol. Chem.)

Defn: A bacteroid ferment.

ZYMOSE
Zy*mose", n. (Chem.)

Defn: Invertin.

ZYMOSIS
Zy*mo"sis, n. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. (Med.)
(a) A fermentation; hence, an analogous process by which an
infectious disease is believed to be developed.
(b) A zymotic disease. [R.]

ZYMOTIC
Zy*mot"ic, a. Etym: [Gr.

1. Of, pertaining to, or caused by, fermentation.

2. (Med.)

Defn: Designating, or pertaining to, a certain class of diseases. See
Zymotic disease, below. Zymotic disease (Med.), any epidemic,
endemic, contagious, or sporadic affection which is produced by some
morbific principle or organism acting on the system like a ferment.

ZYTHEM
Zy"them, n.

Defn: See Zythum.

ZYTHEPSARY
Zy*thep"sa*ry, n. Etym: [Gr.

Defn: A brewery. [R.]

ZYTHUM
Zy"thumn. Etym: [L.fr. Gr.

Defn: A kind of ancient malt beverage; a liquor made from malt and
wheat. [Written also zythem.]






End of Project Gutenberg's Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY ***

***** This file should be named 29765-8.txt or 29765-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/7/6/29765/

Produced by Graham Lawrence

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.